feat: kubernetes Server Side Apply Proposal (#80)
strimzi/proposals: 052-k8s-server-side-apply.md

The precise log we saw was: 

```
2023-03-03 14:25:52 DEBUG ResourceDiff:38 - Reconciliation #178(timer) Kafka(kafka-backup-spike/kafka-backup-spike): StatefulSet kafka-backup-spike-zookeeper differs: {"op":"replace","path":"/metadata/annotations/policies.kyverno.io~1last-applied-patches","value":""}
```

This shows a diff found in the annotations of a `StatefulSet` (this was before StrimziPodSets) which generates the behaviour desribed above.

## Motivation

Once this change is made it will allow third party tools within the cluster to interact with Strimzi owned resources without looping and Strimzi will be operating as if it never knew about them.

## Proposal

This proposal makes Kubernetes keep track of each field's "owner" and any changes submitted to those fields will be compared to the remote state before being applied. 

This would let the Kubernetes apiserver handle the three-way diff, updates etc, and allow other controllers, webhooks etc to touch fields, labels, annotations etc the operator doesn't care about.

> Conflicts can happen with Server Side Apply as described [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply), it is open to choose the method that Strimzi would use for this.

Reviewer: Strimzi might be able to choose -> but this proposal should decide what it chooses / how it will handle it. And I think I'm missing that decision here. If it is hidden in the _Kubernetes suggests_ / _Kubernetes recommends_ parts, I did not get it and maybe it needs to be made more clear.

[Kubernetes suggest](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#conflicts:~:text=It%20is%20strongly%20recommended%20for%20controllers%20to%20always%20%22force%22%20conflicts%2C%20since%20they%20might%20not%20be%20able%20to%20resolve%20or%20act%20on%20these%20conflicts.) using the above _force_ method to make sure Strimzi have control over the parts they want. As described in the Kubernetes docs _"This forces the operation to succeed, changes the value of the field, and removes the field from all other managers' entries in managedFields"_, this obviously means if another party is _forcing_ the same field that they will create a loop of ownership but this would be rare as operators should only care about their own fields.

[Kubernetes recommend](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#upgrading-from-client-side-apply-to-server-side-apply:~:text=the%20object%20doesn%27t%20have%20to%20be%20read%20beforehand) omitting the `GET` call from the Kubernetes API, given that we only want to send the API our desired fields and leave it up to the API to solve.

> The thing here is that by removing `GET`, we would always need to `UPDATE` with the desired status and allow Kubernetes to resolve it. This would in theory be 1 API call made by Strimzi per reconciliation as opposed to more. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow this line. One reconciliation is many calls as it contains many resources. And the only question is whether it is 1 GET + 0 or 1 UPDATES or 1 UPDATE. Is that what it tries to say?

Existing Resources (Pods/ConfigMaps/etc) contain a patch strategy in the [upstream docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/pod-v1/), this explains how Server Side Apply will merge fields together, this will be unique to every field and if no strategy is listed then it can be assumed the whole field is changed each time. If this occurs and is not a desired behaviour then we can stick to the Read -> edit -> apply method instead for those examples with a justification.

> There is more documentation within the [Merge Strategy][https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy] documentation in which it defines how we can change CRDs to merge how we want them to (StrimziPodSet, for example). For reference, there are two main kinds: `atomic` and `map`/`set`/`granular`; with `atomic` set, any change replaces the whole field/list and is recursive downwards; with the others the behaviour is more fine-tuned and is described on the above link in a table.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow this. We do not tend to patch our own CRs with the exception of StrimziPodSets where I do not expect anyone else to patch it (as it is really an internal resource).

Author: This is to define how Kubernetes manages patches on server-side, if you want to keep everything locked down then I guess `atomic` sounds like it makes the most sense as it mirrors a lot of current client-side apply behaviour; in that if any part of a "strimzi-owned" field changes on a resource, the diff will occur in the reconciliation, the update will be made and the whole field will then be overwritten and owned by Strimzi

### Code changes

> It appears as simple as modifying [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#LL263C88-L263C102).

Reviewer: _It appears as simple as modifying this line ..._ ... plus all the other changes below. Maybe we could add a list of all the changes needed and then dive into detail. I'm also still missing what is the plan for the `create` method -> I think that should use server-side-apply as well?

From:

```
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.JSON), desired);
```

To:

<!-- Note: change the below examples to serverSideApply once we know how -->
```
....patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);
```

> It has been suggested that the first pass of a Server-Side Apply would keep `force = false` and if a conflict were to arise then set `force = true`, this provides better visibility as to when these events may occur.

Reviewer: Suggested by what or whom? The proposal essentially defines what we should do. So it should simply say what will be done.

Also, the `StrimziPodSetOperator` patches this method [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/StrimziPodSetOperator.java#L65), this would need updating too. 
It would also need confirming that all resource creates/updates go through `serverSideApply`, not something that should be done in this proposal.

And [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#:~:text=through%20declarative%20configurations.-,Clients%20can%20create,-and%20modify%20their)/[Fabric8io](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/master/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply:~:text=For%20any%20create%20or%20update) recommend it is used on CREATE also:
[From](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#L272):

```
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.created(operation().inNamespace(namespace).resource(desired).create());
```

To:

```

> ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.patched(operation().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);

Reviewer: Can the `ReconcileResult` be constructed for the server-side-apply calls in the same way as it is done today?

Author: Please could I have some clarification on this question? I'm not sure I fully understand what you are asking here :)

Reviewer: I'm basically asking what is the impact of the sever-side-apply on the ReconcileResult and the ways how it is used - if there is any.

```

According to the [package being used](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

> NOTE: The version of fabric8io being used is [6.6.1](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/pom.xml#L106) which [contains Server Side Apply](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

Reviewer: Not sure it matters ... but it is now 6.7.2. Maybe better to avoid the exact version and just say from which version on is it supported ;-).

The operators will need modifying:
* The [`ResourceDiff`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/c3522cf4b17004004a676854d37ba01bb9a44800/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ResourceDiff.java#L46-L78) will need to filter only `metadata.managedFields` (with `strimzi-cluster-operator` as the manager) to compute whether a change is needed as to not trigger a reconcile loop for externally owned resource paths.

> * This will allow the removal of `ignorableFields` throughout the codebase as paths are being selected now, rather than filtering out fields.

Reviewer: So, is this still needed if we use the server side apply without GET first?

| x                      | not set                | Not Strimzi | no               | yes                 |
| not set                | y                      | Strimzi     | yes              | no                  |
| not set                | y                      | Not Strimzi | yes              | no                  |

The key thing to take from this table is that currently Strimzi is trying to make changes to ALL fields (minus short `ignorableFields` list), once Strimzi has knowledge of the fields it owns - we don't want it to try and change the fields it doesn't own.

It would be wise to try and include this in as many operators as possible, but in some situations where it is decided against it can be overridden in the code and left as is.

### Modifications to existing behaviours

The only change to existing (non-Strimzi specific) behaviours is that `ResourceDiff` won't care about other fields it chooses not to care about. This does mean that another entity within the cluster can modify things without Strimzi's knowledge, but it shouldn't matter if the `metadata.managedFields` are chosen correctly.

> I do not know the codebase for the strimzi kafka operator so cannot comment on specific behaviours that might change, as this is just a proposal I suspect that is better placed in the eventual PR if this proposal gets accepted.

Reviewer: * This still does not explain how will the managed fields be chosen. I also do not understand what exactly will the resource diff do after reading this.
* Sorry, but I don't really think this is how our proposals work. When the proposal is approved, it means this is what the community wants to do this. And it makes not much sense to approve something that we do not know what it is. So you should either figure it out or take an assumption and if that assumption cannot be fulfilled, the approved proposal cannot be implemented and a new one (or a modification) can be decided on. Or you should not cover it and hope nobody asks about it. But the proposals with a statement like this do not seem to make sense to me.

For users:

* If you want to configure something for a single object (e.g. a single Kafka cluster), and it's in scope of the configuration, use that
* If you want to configure something that's not the currently configurable fields, you can use other mechanisms to do so (Kyverno, other controllers), and Strimzi won't interfere
* If you must configure something through some other method, and it's not directly being set in a different way by Strimzi, then Strimzi won't interfere and it'll "just work" (e.g. cattle annotations, pvc resizing annotations, metallb annotations. The user didn't make a choice about this other than the "I want to run Strimzi on this cluster that uses those technologies")

> * If you (and again this may not be the direct user of Strimzi, but the platform/corporate/enterprise team enforcing policy on a wide scale) want to set certain fields, then again if it doesn't conflict, go for it. (e.g., The Datadog admission controller setting labels, Kyverno setting labels or annotations or automated topologySpreadConstraints)

Reviewer: As I said before. I do not think this should be recommended as it will cause all kind of problems related to support etc. Platform/corporate/enterprise should always prefer validating rather then changing things. If you want to do this, your call. But it should not be in the proposal as a recommendation.

This does not add the possibility of conflicts, they already exist. This reduces the liklihood of reaching a conflict and has some mechanisms in place to avoid them once they are found, although it is still possible if 2 controllers are forcing ownership on the same field of the same resource.

### Three-way diff

The live object (A) is stored in the `.metadata`, `.spec` etc. The knowledge of which fields the client previously applied, and indeed all clients (B) is stored in the `.metadata.managedFields`. And the incoming object (C) is supplied by the client. Kubernetes knows which fields were previously set by the client (in the case that the new object no longer specifies some, and they can be removed), and it knows about which client set all the other fields, and will keep them around instead of wiping out all the other labels etc.

## Compatibility

This proposal aims to be feature-flagged as not to affect existing use of Strimzi, but also allow people to "upgrade" at their own / controlled pace.
A proposed name is `useServerSideApply`.

> It should follow the same protocol as other feature gates, such as [`UseStrimziPodSets`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/bcecad71b3676194ec7e17f245aef8d23556908a/CHANGELOG.md) (which was deployed in `0.28.0`, moved to beta in `0.30.0` and graduated in `0.35.0`).

Reviewer: You should add some exact schedule ... e.g. 0.37-0.39 in alpha, 0.40-0.42 in beta etc. I think all other proposals with feature gate have that. If that moves because for example it is merged only for 0.38, that is not a problem.

## Rejected alternatives

> We considered adding a new ENV VAR which could take a list of Kubernetes resource paths to be ignored (or labels/annotations directly), but Kubernetes Server Side Apply is designed to do this job and considering it's within Kubernetes it seems wise to take the "out-of-the-box" option.

Reviewer: Maybe you can add a note about the need to test both ways in parallel as well in the case of the environment variable which would be a lot of effort going on _forever_. I think that is a strong argument why not do it.

The thing here is that by removing `GET`, we would always need to `UPDATE` with the desired status and allow Kubernetes to resolve it. This would in theory be 1 API call made by Strimzi per resource per reconciliation as opposed to more. 
[Kuberenetes suggest](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/10/20/advanced-server-side-apply/#reconstructive-controllers) there are two ways to write controllers with Server Side Apply, the first being a modification to the existing "Read-Modify-Update" method that Strimzi is currently using, to compute the changes in a similar fashion but only on the fields Strimzi owns. The second (and recommended) way is that you reconstruct the whole resource for every reconciliation (of each resource) and Apply that, letting Kubernetes manage it. The advantages and disadvantages are discussed in the above link. Notably a NO OP Apply is not very taxing on the API and can reduce the number of calls by quite a lot. **Ideally Strimzi would do it the second way, that is we can remove all comparison logic and storing of state and all GET requests, and just rebuild the resource every time and Server Side Apply it.**

> Existing Resources (Pods/ConfigMaps/etc) contain a patch strategy in the [upstream docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/pod-v1/), this explains how Server Side Apply will merge fields together, this will be unique to every field and if no strategy is listed then it can be assumed the whole field is changed each time. If this occurs and is not a desired behaviour then we can stick to the Read -> edit -> apply method instead for those examples with a justification.

Reviewer: What does this part mean? `If this occurs and is not a desired behavior then we can stick to the Read -> edit -> apply method instead for those examples with a justification.`? I understand the first sentence as the Kube API spec defining how the fields will be merged. But I'm not sure I understand where would it not work, how would we understand it does not work and how will we implement the fallback you suggest.

Author: You had previously commented saying ConfigMaps might not work as desired with SSA (Server-Side Apply) and so I put this line as an alternative to using SSA, but I don't think it's a good idea as it means maintaining both SSA and the old (existing) method of apply.

Reviewer: Yeah, I mentioned that. But it was just something I heard. I think we need to verify if it is really the case and if it is needed. If it would not be needed, it is definitely easier to avoid this.

Author: I shall test this locally and update :)

Reviewer: I gave this a quick try. Good and bad news:
* It seems to delete the fields it owns. So from this perspective, it should work fine for us as we should be the ones owning the config maps / secrets and nobody should edit them. And if someone edits them, it is their problem to also remove the fields I guess. So we might not need this at least for Secrets and CMs (not sure why Pods were listed here as they are in general not editable, so not sure how it applies to them).
* To make this work, one needs to have a stable identity for the field manager owning the fields in the map which should be covered in the proposal. Please see the separate comment I starts for it.

Author: Nice - thanks for updating! That saves me a job today 😄 
Yes I am discussing the field manager more in the next update.

### Code changes

We need to:
* Modify the PATCH/CREATE commands to server-side apply
* Remove the GET commands
* Change the ResourceDiff (and other similar functions) to only look at `strimzi-cluster-operator` owned resources (within `metadata.managedFields`)
* Update tests

---

### **Modify the PATCH/CREATE commands to server-side apply**
Modify [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#LL263C88-L263C102).
From:

```
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.JSON), desired);
```

To:

<!-- Note: change the below examples to serverSideApply once we know how -->
```

> ....patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);

Reviewer 2: how does using `withForce(true)` cope with the following sentence mentioned at the beginning ...

> The first pass of a Server-Side Apply would keep `force = false` and if a conflict were to arise then set `force = true`, this provides better visibility as to when these events may occur.

```

Also, the `StrimziPodSetOperator` patches this method [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/StrimziPodSetOperator.java#L65), this would need updating too. 

> It would also need confirming that all resource creates/updates go through `serverSideApply`, not something that should be done in this proposal.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what do you mean with this sentence. If there is a PR that replaces the create / update calls with the server-side apply, then that would be the confirmation, or?

And [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#:~:text=through%20declarative%20configurations.-,Clients%20can%20create,-and%20modify%20their)/[Fabric8io](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/master/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply:~:text=For%20any%20create%20or%20update) recommend it is used on CREATE also:
[From](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#L272):

```
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.created(operation().inNamespace(namespace).resource(desired).create());
```

To:

```

> ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.patched(operation().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);

Reviewer: Something that was not covered so far and should be probably added as well ... it looks like by default, Fabric8 will set the field manager to `fabric8`. I guess we should set it to some custom value? E.g. `strimzi-cluster-operator`? It seems to be possible only in the patch context I guess?

Reviewer: Actually, I'm not sure. In an existing cluster I have, it seems to be set to `strimzi-cluster-operator` as the field manager. Not sure if that was deduced from the service account? If yes, why running the client locally does use `fabric8`? I think this should be figured out. For the server side apply to work properly, it should ideally use a single field manager and it should be the same field manager all the time otherwise there will be a mess in the patching of any maps. So I think this should be discussed and included in this proposal as well.

Author: Yes I noticed the same thing when I looked at Strimzi field owners recently, [kubernetes state that](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#:~:text=its%20default%20is%20computed%20from%20the%20user%2Dagent.) "its default is computed from the user-agent."

So I guess setting it every time for every call we make to Kubernetes will make it consistent.

Author: This is something that would need the code to change to discover, or we can try and find an example operator setting the `fieldManager` and install it locally and check it out

Author: Looks like [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/4a5bec44d8e2c4dd55bfd5d5764afd6639afe230/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/Main.java#L89) is why some resources have `strimzi-cluster-operator`

```

> Here `ReconcileResult` would be the `patched` type so would behave as such, code that relies on looking for `created` would need to be updated.

Reviewer: Is there any code that relies on it? If yes, where and how would it be updated?

| current value of field | desired value of field | field owner | requires update? | change in behaviour |
| --------               | --------               | ------      | ---------------- | ------------------- |
| x                      | x                      | Strimzi     | no               | no                  |
| x                      | y                      | Strimzi     | yes              | no                  |
| x                      | not set                | Strimzi     | yes              | no                  |
| x                      | not set                | Not Strimzi | no               | yes                 |
| not set                | y                      | Strimzi     | yes              | no                  |
| not set                | y                      | Not Strimzi | yes              | no                  |

The key thing to take from this table is that currently Strimzi is trying to make changes to ALL fields (minus short `ignorableFields` list), once Strimzi has knowledge of the fields it owns - we don't want it to try and change the fields it doesn't own.

> It would be wise to try and include this in as many operators as possible, but in some situations where it is decided against it can be overridden in the code and left as is.

Reviewer: In one of the above sections, I understood that we do not want to do GET anymore (based on the recommendations from Kubernetes) but want to simply always call server-side apply. So what role does the ResourceDIff play and what would it diff without GETs?

It seems like the only place where diffing would be needed would be the custom resource status updates (in order to avoid infinite loops).

----

The example points to the `ServiceOperator` which indeed today imports some fields from the existing resource (I think this happens in few other places as well). But it is not clear why this needs some special attention - why would server side apply simply handle it?

----

Assuming it is needed somewhere -> it would be lso good to provide some more details on how exactly would this part work: `filter only `metadata.managedFields` (with `strimzi-cluster-operator` as the manager) to compare the current desired state and the new desired state, before sending it to the Kubernetes API`.

Author: Good points, updating readme to better represent my understanding/idea

---
### Modifications to existing behaviours

The only change to existing (non-Strimzi specific) behaviours is that `ResourceDiff` won't care about other fields it chooses not to care about. This does mean that another entity within the cluster can modify things without Strimzi's knowledge, but it shouldn't matter if the `metadata.managedFields` are chosen correctly.

For users:

* If you want to configure something for a single object (e.g. a single Kafka cluster), and it's in scope of the configuration, use that
* If you want to configure something that's not the currently configurable fields, you can use other mechanisms to do so (Kyverno, other controllers), and Strimzi won't interfere
* If you must configure something through some other method, and it's not directly being set in a different way by Strimzi, then Strimzi won't interfere and it'll "just work" (e.g. cattle annotations, pvc resizing annotations, metallb annotations. The user didn't make a choice about this other than the "I want to run Strimzi on this cluster that uses those technologies")

> This does not add the possibility of conflicts, they already exist. This reduces the liklihood of reaching a conflict and has some mechanisms in place to avoid them once they are found, although it is still possible if 2 controllers are forcing ownership on the same field of the same resource.

Reviewer: Just a typo ... liklihood -> likelihood

### Three-way diff

> The live object (A) is stored in the `.metadata`, `.spec` etc. The knowledge of which fields the client previously applied, and indeed all clients (B) is stored in the `.metadata.managedFields`. And the incoming object (C) is supplied by the client. Kubernetes knows which fields were previously set by the client (in the case that the new object no longer specifies some, and they can be removed), and it knows about which client set all the other fields, and will keep them around instead of wiping out all the other labels etc.

Reviewer: I still don't follow this part. How will we set which fields are managed by Strimzi. Will it be only the fields set to some value? Or will it be all fields which Strimzi allows users to configure even if they are null / not set?

I assume it will be the first one - but I think it should be clarified.

----

I think this also defines the backward incompatible change / Modifications to existing behaviours which is important for existing users to weigh in. E.g. does not setting for example `affinity` in the Kafka CR mean Strimzi enforces it to be null (i.e. it owns all fields it supports as configuration and enforces them to be not set if not set) or just ignores it (i.e. it owns only the values which are set and the values not set can be set by someone else without Strimzi overwriting them). 

I assume you want to ignore the unset fields since that was where we started this proposal. But this is an important change which I think has to be clearly described in the previous section. Right now, you cover there how will it work and what will be possible (which is ok and can stay there), but you do not touch on what actually changes for the users which I think is very important for understanding the consequences.

## Compatibility

> This proposal aims to be feature-flagged as not to affect existing use of Strimzi, but also allow people to "upgrade" at their own / controlled pace.

Reviewer: I think the `not to affect existing use of Strimzi` could be a bit misleading. As the feature gate graduates, they will be affected eventually. Maybe we can put it like this?

```suggestion
This proposal aims to be feature-flagged to allow a gradual roll-out of this change to the users and give them time to adjust their own environments to it.
```

A proposed name is `useServerSideApply`.
It should follow the same protocol as other feature gates, such as [`UseStrimziPodSets`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/bcecad71b3676194ec7e17f245aef8d23556908a/CHANGELOG.md) (which was deployed in `0.28.0`, moved to beta in `0.30.0` and graduated in `0.35.0`), the suggested protocol here is:
* alpha at `0.37.0`
* beta at `0.40.0`
* graduated at `0.43.0`

### Mock server

We have seen the [Fabric8 Mock Server](https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver) in CRUD mode returns an error when using the `patch()` call (with server-side apply) when attempting to create a new resource, there is an existing issue [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver/issues/76) which would need fixing also.

> The Mock Server could be put into Expectation Mode to allow us to override this behaviour, but it would require a lot more maintenance to upkeep.

Reviewer: So, what does this mean? I read it as that https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver/issues/76 needs to be implemented first? 

I do not think we can really use the _expectations mode_. We have plenty of unit tests that rely on mocking the Kubernetes API in the code which is IMHO roughly similar. It works fine for simpler tests (and it would need to be updated as well, but I do not expect any major issues there, just plenty of work). But the Mock in the CRUD mode is irreplaceable as you can test everything without maintaining too many different mocks.

I wanted to investigate also https://github.com/java-operator-sdk/jenvtest as a replacement. But right now, I do not know if it works any better. I think it also doesn't support all the platforms which Strimzi supports.

Author: If you want to stay in CRUD mode then the mockserver currently won't work with SSA, which is a problem and would need addressing before it can be used.

Reviewer: Can we maybe made here a more clear statement that this will need to be addressed? I think the intention is there, but might be good to make it more clear for other reviewers:
```suggestion
We have seen the [Fabric8 Mock Server](https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver) in CRUD mode returns an error when using the `patch()` call (with server-side apply) when attempting to create a new resource, there is an existing issue [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver/issues/76) which would need fixing also.
The Mock Server could be put into Expectation Mode to allow us to override this behaviour, but it would require a lot more maintenance to upkeep.
The limitations will be addressed either in the Fabric8 Mock Server or by moving to another Mock Server as part of the server-side apply implementation.
```

[Kubernetes recommend](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#upgrading-from-client-side-apply-to-server-side-apply:~:text=the%20object%20doesn%27t%20have%20to%20be%20read%20beforehand) omitting the `GET` call from the Kubernetes API, given that we only want to send the API our desired fields and leave it up to the API to solve.
The thing here is that by removing `GET`, we would always need to `UPDATE` with the desired status and allow Kubernetes to resolve it. This would in theory be 1 API call made by Strimzi per resource per reconciliation as opposed to more. 

> [Kuberenetes suggest](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/10/20/advanced-server-side-apply/#reconstructive-controllers) there are two ways to write controllers with Server Side Apply, the first being a modification to the existing "Read-Modify-Update" method that Strimzi is currently using, to compute the changes in a similar fashion but only on the fields Strimzi owns. The second (and recommended) way is that you reconstruct the whole resource for every reconciliation (of each resource) and Apply that, letting Kubernetes manage it. The advantages and disadvantages are discussed in the above link. Notably a NO OP Apply is not very taxing on the API and can reduce the number of calls by quite a lot. **Ideally Strimzi would do it the second way, that is we can remove all comparison logic and storing of state and all GET requests, and just rebuild the resource every time and Server Side Apply it.**

Reviewer: The proposal should say what Strimzi will do. So I would probably phrase it for example like this:

```suggestion
[Kuberenetes suggest](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/10/20/advanced-server-side-apply/#reconstructive-controllers) there are two ways to write controllers with Server Side Apply, the first being a modification to the existing "Read-Modify-Update" method that Strimzi is currently using, to compute the changes in a similar fashion but only on the fields Strimzi owns. The second (and recommended) way is that you reconstruct the whole resource for every reconciliation (of each resource) and Apply that, letting Kubernetes manage it. The advantages and disadvantages are discussed in the above link. Notably a NO OP Apply is not very taxing on the API and can reduce the number of calls by quite a lot. **Strimzi will adopt the second way, that is we can remove all comparison logic and storing of state and all GET requests, and just rebuild the resource every time and Server Side Apply it.**
```

There is more documentation within the [Merge Strategy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy) documentation in which it defines how we can change CRDs to merge how we want them to (StrimziPodSet, for example). For reference, there are two main kinds: `atomic` and `map`/`set`/`granular`; with `atomic` set, any change replaces the whole field/list and is recursive downwards; with the others the behaviour is more fine-tuned and is described on the above link in a table.

### Code changes

We need to:
* Modify the PATCH/CREATE commands to server-side apply
* Remove the GET commands
* Remove the ResourceDiff (and other similar functions)
* Update tests

---

### **Modify the PATCH/CREATE commands to server-side apply**
Modify [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#LL263C88-L263C102).
From:

```java
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.JSON), desired);
```

To:

> <!-- Note: change the below examples to serverSideApply once we know how -->

Reviewer: This might be a limitation of Fabric8 - I did not find a way how to use the `serverSideApply` with the options. I would not worry about this and maybe just remove this note. I think I was the one raising this on the beginning - but that was mostly due to not understanding the limitations.

[From](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#L272):

```java
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.created(operation().inNamespace(namespace).resource(desired).create());
```

To:

```java
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.patched(operation().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withFieldManager("strimzi-cluster-operator").withForce(true).build(), desired);
```

And to set without `Force`, as aforementioned for the first pass:

```java
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.patched(operation().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withFieldManager("strimzi-cluster-operator").withForce(false).build(), desired);
```

> Currently `ReconcileResult.patched` is used for `patch` and `ReconcileResult.created` is used for `create` operations. We will no longer be making an initial GET request to determine the current resource, so will always be using a PATCH request and returning `ReconcileResult.patched`. There is no code specifically using the `ReconcileResult.Created` type to determine behaviour that we can see, it is only used in tests.

Reviewer: Not 100% critical for the proposal. But maybe more curios question ... knowing whether the resource is created or patched is quite important when analyzing different issues (e.g. some other tooling deleting some resources). Is there some way to get the result of the ServerSideApply call at the log level? E.g. be able to for example log at debug something like `Resource X with name Y was created`, `Resource X with name Y was patched`, or `Resource X with name Y did not change`

---

Additionally - and this might be more important - the `ReconcileResult` has 4 states. Created, patched, deleted and noop. Is the noop also not used for anything? I think that in the past we used it to for example see if certificates changed. But I think we might not do that anymore.

Reviewer 3: > Is there some way to get the result of the ServerSideApply call at the log level?

Looks like that's a yes from the API perspective
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/56b5f05aea6f32db3b81417ce5d3508dc80a33ea/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/rest/request.go#L1389-L1394
- https://github.com/kubernetes/apiserver/blob/1f1467cf86675941d0552b8d6baf69abd7df420b/pkg/endpoints/handlers/patch.go#L234-L237

However, I don't see that this is exposed in the fabric8 client

Reviewer: Thanks for looking into it. For issue analysis, I guess Fabric8 might log it somewhere (or it should be at least easy to add to it). So that should be fine.

Reviewer: Back to the second part abotu the `noop` -> there seem to be at least three places where we depend on it (search for `patchResult instanceof ReconcileResult.Noop` - there might be more with other code, not sure). So I think we should include how to deal with that as well.

Author: Obviously this is still a proposal and I am not a Java engineer able to test, but I'd image `.patch()` call would still return a `patchResult` in a [similar way](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/834bfc894475a3204029c2abd1426d4200ca3b22/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaExporterReconciler.java#L191C21-L192C46), I am struggling to find where it is defined in Kubernetes code but I'd suggest this is something that can be handled during the implementation of the proposal.

Reviewer: The problem is that it seems we will not have information on whether the result is a patch, create or noop. So this condition will not work and will need to be worked around. We can probably leave it to the PR. But we should not forget about it as it might not necessarily throw an error in the compiler.

According to the [package being used](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

NOTE: The versions of fabric8io used by Strimzi [contain Server Side Apply](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

---
### **Remove the ResourceDiff**

> The operators will need modifying:

Reviewer: This line suggests that the `ResourceDiff` needs to be modified. But the point bellow suggests it can be removed, or?

The precise log we saw was: 

```
2023-03-03 14:25:52 DEBUG ResourceDiff:38 - Reconciliation #178(timer) Kafka(kafka-backup-spike/kafka-backup-spike): StatefulSet kafka-backup-spike-zookeeper differs: {"op":"replace","path":"/metadata/annotations/policies.kyverno.io~1last-applied-patches","value":""}
```

This shows a diff found in the annotations of a `StatefulSet` (this was before StrimziPodSets) which generates the behaviour desribed above.

## Motivation

Once this change is made it will allow third party tools within the cluster to interact with Strimzi owned resources without looping and Strimzi will be operating as if it never knew about them.

## Proposal

This proposal makes Kubernetes keep track of each field's "owner" and any changes submitted to those fields will be compared to the remote state before being applied. 

This would let the Kubernetes apiserver handle the three-way diff, updates etc, and allow other controllers, webhooks etc to touch fields, labels, annotations etc the operator doesn't care about.

> Conflicts can happen with Server Side Apply as described [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply). The first pass of a Server-Side Apply would keep `force = false` and if a conflict were to arise then set `force = true`, this provides better visibility as to when these events may occur.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Conflicts can happen with Server Side Apply as described [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply). The first pass of a Server-Side Apply would keep `force = false` and if a conflict were to arise then set `force = true`, which provides better visibility as to when these events may occur.
```

### Code changes

We need to:
* Modify the PATCH/CREATE commands to server-side apply
* Remove the GET commands
* Remove the ResourceDiff (and other similar functions)
* Update tests

---

### **Modify the PATCH/CREATE commands to server-side apply**
Modify [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#LL263C88-L263C102).
From:

```java
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.JSON), desired);
```

To:

```java
....patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withFieldManager("strimzi-cluster-operator").withForce(true).build(), desired);
```

And to set without `Force`, as aforementioned for the first pass:

```java
....patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withFieldManager("strimzi-cluster-operator").withForce(false).build(), desired);

> ```

Reviewer 2: There is something I don't get yet, maybe my misunderstanding.
From a previous description you say:

> Conflicts can happen with Server Side Apply as described [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply). The first pass of a Server-Side Apply would keep `force = false` and if a conflict were to arise then set `force = true`, this provides better visibility as to when these events may occur.

the corresponding K8S cheatsheet also says to do the patch (with force=false) and then forcing (force=true) if it was modified by "someone" else.

From the code above it looks to me you are doing the opposite? What am I missing?

Author: This is just an example of how to code the Server-Side Apply, you would send a `withForce(false)` and then a `withForce(true)` if there was a conflict.

Author: Perhaps the ordering is poor, but the note above that line says:
```
And to set without `Force`, as aforementioned for the first pass:
```

> Also, the `StrimziPodSetOperator` patches this method [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/StrimziPodSetOperator.java#L65), this would need updating too. Every create/update call from the existing Operator should become a `serverSideApply` patch call.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also, the `StrimziPodSetOperator` patches this method [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/StrimziPodSetOperator.java#L65), which would need updating too. Every create/update call from the existing Operator should become a `serverSideApply` patch call.
```

This does not add the possibility of conflicts, they already exist. This reduces the likelihood of reaching a conflict and has some mechanisms in place to avoid them once they are found, although it is still possible if 2 controllers are forcing ownership on the same field of the same resource.

### Three-way diff

The live object (A) is stored in the `.metadata`, `.spec` etc. The knowledge of which fields the client previously applied, and indeed all clients (B) is stored in the `.metadata.managedFields`. And the incoming object (C) is supplied by the client. Kubernetes knows which fields were previously set by the client (in the case that the new object no longer specifies some, and they can be removed), and it knows about which client set all the other fields, and will keep them around instead of wiping out all the other labels etc.
Kubernetes knows this information as it is set in the `patch` call, example:
```java
PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withFieldManager("strimzi-cluster-operator").withForce(true).build();
```

> Currently, if a field that Strimzi owns is unset by a user then Strimzi sets a default value. This behaviour will stay the same as the Operator can choose which fields to default if unset by a user when constructing the resource to send to Kubernetes API, this means that if `affinity` is unset then the Operator can set it before Applying and Kubernetes will know it is owned by Strimzi.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently, if a field that Strimzi owns is unset by a user then Strimzi sets a default value. This behaviour will stay the same as the Operator can choose which fields to default if unset by a user when constructing the resource to send to Kubernetes API, which means that if `affinity` is unset then the Operator can set it before Applying and Kubernetes will know it is owned by Strimzi.
```

## Compatibility

This proposal aims to be feature-flagged to allow a gradual roll-out of this change to the users and give them time to adjust their own environments to it.
A proposed name is `useServerSideApply`.

> It should follow the same protocol as other feature gates, such as [`UseStrimziPodSets`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/bcecad71b3676194ec7e17f245aef8d23556908a/CHANGELOG.md) (which was deployed in `0.28.0`, moved to beta in `0.30.0` and graduated in `0.35.0`), the suggested protocol here is:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It should follow the same protocol as other feature gates, such as [`UseStrimziPodSets`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/bcecad71b3676194ec7e17f245aef8d23556908a/CHANGELOG.md) (which was deployed in `0.28.0`, moved to beta in `0.30.0` and graduated in `0.35.0`). The suggested protocol here is:
```

* alpha at `0.37.0`
* beta at `0.40.0`
* graduated at `0.43.0`

### Mock server

We have seen the [Fabric8 Mock Server](https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver) in CRUD mode returns an error when using the `patch()` call (with server-side apply) when attempting to create a new resource, there is an existing issue [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/mockwebserver/issues/76) which would need fixing also.
The Mock Server could be put into Expectation Mode to allow us to override this behaviour, but it would require a lot more maintenance to upkeep.
The limitations will be addressed either in the Fabric8 Mock Server or by moving to another Mock Server as part of the server-side apply implementation.

## Rejected alternatives

We considered adding a new ENV VAR which could take a list of Kubernetes resource paths to be ignored (or labels/annotations directly), but Kubernetes Server Side Apply is designed to do this job and considering it's within Kubernetes it seems wise to take the "out-of-the-box" option.

> Another consequence of using ENV VARs would be the upkeep of both the existing way (hard-coded ignore paths) and the new way (server-side apply), this is a lot of overhead and we should just go with the one idea.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another consequence of using ENV VARs would be the overhead of using the existing approach (hard-coded ignore paths) and the new approach (server-side apply), rather than using a single approach. 
```

The key thing to take from this table is that currently Strimzi is trying to make changes to ALL fields (minus short `ignorableFields` list), once Strimzi has knowledge of the fields it owns - we don't want it to try and change the fields it doesn't own. Also Strimzi will be sending a PATCH call for every resource every reconciliation loop, so where no fields have changed it will be a NO-OP with little resource usage.

---
### Modifications to existing behaviours

The only change to existing (non-Strimzi specific) behaviours is that `ResourceDiff` won't care about other fields it chooses not to care about. This does mean that another entity within the cluster can modify things without Strimzi's knowledge, but it shouldn't matter if the `metadata.managedFields` are chosen correctly.

For users:

* If you want to configure something for a single object (e.g. a single Kafka cluster), and it's in scope of the configuration, use that
* If you want to configure something that's not the currently configurable fields, you can use other mechanisms to do so (Kyverno, other controllers), and Strimzi won't interfere

> * If you must configure something through some other method, and it's not directly being set in a different way by Strimzi, then Strimzi won't interfere and it'll "just work" (e.g. cattle annotations, pvc resizing annotations, metallb annotations. The user didn't make a choice about this other than the "I want to run Strimzi on this cluster that uses those technologies")

Reviewer 5: I could follow this section, but I think it would be clearer and more concrete to users if we provided a couple of examples.

Author: I'm not sure what other examples I could add to this that would enhance it?
It is just saying if you want to use `annotations` that interact with other operators (such as the ones listed above) then you can, and Strimzi won't interfere?

Reviewer 5: I'm saying that the language used to explain it (e.g. "If you want to configure something for a single object (e.g. a single Kafka cluster), and it's in scope of the configuration, use that") is quite abstract. A casual reader might struggle to really understand this in concrete terms (e.g. in that sentence does 'Kafka' mean a `Kafka` CR? Does 'configuration' mean the `spec.kafka.configuration`?). I think a snippet of YAML showing an example, for the `Kafka` CR, of the first and second bullets would really help such readers.

Author: Will attempt to rewrite to make it easier for the reader/user to understand 😄

Reviewer: TBH, I'm not sure I understand the example. Strimzi would not care about the any of the annotations on the Kafka CR. Maybe it should be more something like this?

----

* If you want to configure part of a Strimzi Custom Resource (CR) (e.g. `Kafka` CR `replicas`) and the field exists within the CR, then you should use that field
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    template:
      pod:
        metadata:
          annotations:
            custom-annotation: "..." # defined with use of CR, therefore "owned" by Strimzi
    ...
```
* If you want to configure part of a Strimzi CR that is not within the configurable fields (e.g. `annotations` used by another operator) or has a dynamic value, you can apply them in any manner you like and Strimzi won't interfere (unless you define them in the CR itself).
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-cluster-kafka-0
  annotations:
    policies.kyverno.io/last-applied-patches: "..." # applied from Kyverno operator, therefore ignored by Strimzi operator
    custom-annotation: "..." # defined with use of CR, therefore "owned" by Strimzi
spec:
  ...
```

<!-- This template is provided as an example with sections you may wish to comment on with respect to your proposal. Add or remove sections as required to best articulate the proposal. -->

# Kubernetes Server Side Apply

> Make the Topic Operator use [Kubernetes Server Side Apply](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply). This will enable third parties (e.g. Kyverno, Kopf) to have their own labels/annotations on Strimzi owned Kubernetes Resources without Strimzi attempting to remove them.

Reviewer: The name suggests a generic proposal which is about everything ... but here you talk about Topic Operator. That seems to be conflicting information. I wonder what is really the intention.

Author: Good point, modified to `Operators` as the change is in the `operator-common` folder as also added to the proposal

NOTE: Strimzi will still have ownership over the fields it wants.

## Current situation

> As per [Issue 6938](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/6938) third party Kubernetes operators are having a negative interaction with the existing way Strimzi do Kubernetes applies to it's resources.

Reviewer 6: I think this should be `the existing way Strimzi does Kubernetes applies`

> An example is [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) has a policy in a K8s cluster to add a label to all resources with a MutatingWebhookConfiguration, Strimzi detects this label as a resource diff and removes it as it doesn't own it / not included in [hard-coded list of ignored labels](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/c3522cf4b17004004a676854d37ba01bb9a44800/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/resource/StatefulSetDiff.java#LL28C34-L28C49). This triggers the MutatingWebhookConfiguration which re-applies the label and the loop continues.

Reviewer 6: This first sentence could use some reworking. It makes sense, but it's a bit messy.

## Motivation

Once this change is made (which is relatively simple to implement), it will allow third party tools within the cluster to interact with Strimzi owned resources without looping and Strimzi will be operating as if it never knew about them.

## Proposal

> Provide an introduction to the proposal. Use sub sections to call out considerations, possible delivery mechanisms etc.

Reviewer 6: `Use subsections to call out considerations, possible delivery mechanisms, etc.`

You might want to consider making this one sentence, using a conjunction, coma or the fabled semi-colon. It feels like two bullet points at the moment.

Author: This was part of the original template left in 😄 doesn't actually make sense as part of the doc context!

This proposal makes Kubernetes keep track of each field's "owner" and any changes submitted to those fields will be compared to the remote state before being applied. 

> This would let the Kubernetes apiserver handle the three-way diff / updates etc, and allow other controllers / webhooks to touch fields / labels / annotations the operator doesn't care about.

Reviewer 6: Maybe use `resources` in place of `controllers / webhooks` and `control metadata the operator doesn't care about`. The /'s should be replaced with commas either way (including on the three-way diff / updates part).

## Motivation

Once this change is made (which is relatively simple to implement), it will allow third party tools within the cluster to interact with Strimzi owned resources without looping and Strimzi will be operating as if it never knew about them.

## Proposal

This proposal makes Kubernetes keep track of each field's "owner" and any changes submitted to those fields will be compared to the remote state before being applied. 

This would let the Kubernetes apiserver handle the three-way diff, updates etc, and allow other controllers, webhooks etc to touch fields, labels, annotations etc the operator doesn't care about.

It appears as simple as modifying [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#LL263C88-L263C102).
From:

```
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.JSON)...
```

To:

```
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY)...
```

> According to the [package being used](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

Reviewer 3: From this, we might also need to change the create methods to use this too?
> At it's simplest you just need to call ... For any create or update.

NOTE: The version of fabric8io being used is [6.5.1](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/pom.xml#L106) which [contains Server Side Apply](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

> It is likely that other parts of the codebase will need modifying in terms of label/annotation discovery so that they only check labels/annotations that are owned by themselves.

Reviewer 3: I think this is one of the big ones: https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/c3522cf4b17004004a676854d37ba01bb9a44800/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ResourceDiff.java#L46-L78

Instead of it generating a diff of everything that's different instead of a specified list of ignorable paths, it should be generating a diff of all of the paths specified in desired (and ignore everything that wasn't specified)

Reviewer 3: Then all of the `ignorablePaths` bits throughout the codebase can be removed, as can bits like https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ServiceOperator.java#L119

(Currently it's adding in a specific set of annotations from the live cluster into the desired state, so they aren't then diffed etc. With the new approach that's not necessary, as the diff won't care about unknown annotations)

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is the case. Not setting something is not the same as not caring about how it is configured. So I think you can get rid of the ignorable paths, but not completely sure you can get rid of the diff completely. The diff also saves resources so it makes one wonder how would that look with server-side apply ... is calling server-side apply all the time a good choice even without any change?

Author: Removing the diff completely has never been suggested.
What needs to happen is a diff on purely the fields that Strimzi have control over and would want to reconcile on, which means we would not need `ignorablePaths` as they shouldn't be included in the diff to start with, i.e. we don't want to trigger a reconcile on a diff generated by an annotation managed by a third party.

This will then allow the diff to work hand-in-hand with Server Side Apply.

What do you mean by:
> The diff also saves resources

?

Reviewer: > What do you mean by:
> 
> > The diff also saves resources
> 
> ?

Thanks to the diff, we do not trigger unnecessary update calls to the Kubernetes API because we know that nothing changed and there is no need to patch it.

## Motivation

Once this change is made (which is relatively simple to implement), it will allow third party tools within the cluster to interact with Strimzi owned resources without looping and Strimzi will be operating as if it never knew about them.

## Proposal

This proposal makes Kubernetes keep track of each field's "owner" and any changes submitted to those fields will be compared to the remote state before being applied. 

This would let the Kubernetes apiserver handle the three-way diff, updates etc, and allow other controllers, webhooks etc to touch fields, labels, annotations etc the operator doesn't care about.

Conflicts can happen with Server Side Apply as described [here](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply), it is open to choose the method that Strimzi would use for this.

> [Kubernetes suggest](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#conflicts:~:text=It%20is%20strongly%20recommended%20for%20controllers%20to%20always%20%22force%22%20conflicts%2C%20since%20they%20might%20not%20be%20able%20to%20resolve%20or%20act%20on%20these%20conflicts.) using the above _force_ method to make sure Strimzi have control over the parts they want. As described in the Kubernetes docs _"This forces the operation to succeed, changes the value of the field, and removes the field from all other managers' entries in managedFields"_, this obviously means if another party is _forcing_ the same field that they will create a loop of ownership but this would be rare as operators should only care about their own fields.

Reviewer: So, how will the operator detect and force the change? You are quoting from the Kube docs, but that is just a theoretical document. How would this be handled in practice? Will we force everything? Will we detect the issue and force? Does the Kubernetes client handle this?

Reviewer 3: When the operator does a server-side apply, if there are no conflicts, whether you set force or not doesn't matter.

If you set force, then your changes will be applied (and managedFields updated to you), whether or not there was a conflict. If you don't set force, then it will error out if there's a conflict.

All of the above is handled automatically by the server.

How does the operator detect this? It doesn't really care - ResourceDiff still controls whether it tries to do an apply or not, so if it sees something out of sync it cares about it'll do the apply and overwrite any conflicting changes

Reviewer 3: No - The proposal says that we should set force to be true all the time. ResourceDiff doesn't handle conflicts, or control whether force is used or not

ResourceDiff is still used to determine whether or not to do an apply, purely based on the fields it has in desired (but not looking at any other fields of the object)

tbh I'm not sure why we're needing to discuss the actual code changes in the proposal instead of in an actual PR to change the code.

Reviewer 3: > AFAIU, it is proposed that: ...

Yes, that's my current understanding

> Or to put it another way, the cost of a no-op reconcile is still a single GET of the current resource.

Yes

> One very minor change is that (I assume) the apiserver needs a few more cycles to handle a server-side apply, as it has to compute the diff and detect conflicts itself. Right now the kube client sends a JSON patch, rather than the full resource state when using the JSON patch strategy. But the cost is offset because the kube client doesn't have to do it's own GET to compute that JSON patch.

I feel this is going to be an insignificant cost in the context of an operator, and the number of updates/changes that are happening. I think the apiserver still does have to do the work of diffing and detecting conflicts - it needs to update `managedFields` still, which needs to remain consistent with the object state, even if actors are proposing direct changes. (If you're [making non-server-side-apply updates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#apply-and-update), the apiserver will still be updating managedFields, and guessing a manager name from your HTTP user-agent)

> A consequence of 3 is that the Strimzi operator would never know (and by extension the person changing a Strimzi CR may never know) that some other operator/hook's preferred value for a field is being overwritten. Indeed it no one it looking at the output of that Other Thing such a conflict could ping-pong indefinitely. It's easy to make assertions like "this would be rare as operators should only care about their own fields", but in practice those come back to us as bug reports. 

Yeah, and this is actually the current behaviour - The current operator behaviour doesn't know that some other operator/hook/standard k8s machinery is being overwritten, it's overwriting all fields all the time.

We have a few examples of such bug reports:
- https://github.com/orgs/strimzi/discussions/8667 (pvc resizing)
- https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/4035 (cattle annotations)
- https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/6938 (keiko iam controller, metallb, kopf)

My hypothesis is that there will be fewer bug reports in a world where strimzi uses server-side-apply, than in the current world where it does not

> So I wonder if we make a first request with force=false, log a warning (or similar) if there's a conflict and then retry with force=true. That at least makes the game of ping pong more apparent.

Mhm, that's reasonable

Reviewer 3: Yes, you can use APPLY to create (create if not exists or update)
It depends on what triggers the reconcile, I guess?
- You could do an APPLY on being told about an upstream resource change (by watch etc)
  - This is also on startup, with the initial watch? (Haven't checked this is how the code works, just assuming)
- If we're watching the downstream resources too, can also fire off an APPLY when they change

If something downstream is making changes regularly (HPA? .status updates on all sorts of objects?) you may end up with lots of applies happening. But if they're going to be no-ops (because all of the fields set in the `desired` are already correct), then this may not matter?

Author: [This blog by Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/10/20/advanced-server-side-apply/#reconstructive-controllers) goes into this a bit more

It appears as simple as modifying [this line](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#LL263C88-L263C102).
From:

```
....patch(PatchContext.of(PatchType.JSON), desired);
```

To:

```

> ....patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);

Reviewer: Why should `.patch(...)` be used instead of `.serverSideApply(...)`?

Reviewer 3: It should probably be `.serverSideApply` - taking a quick look at the fabric8io code this is a thin wrapper around the `patch` version, but it's not mentioned in the CHEATSHEET.md, so we didn't notice it

Author: Can `.serverSideApply()` have the `force` option?

Author: My Java knowledge is not so good, but we want to be setting `force` with our `serverSideApply()`.
Is this possible with the wrapper that exists:
https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/4e33fffa08aec514a8e86ae7535baa4cdbce3e86/kubernetes-client/src/main/java/io/fabric8/kubernetes/client/dsl/internal/BaseOperation.java#L1131
?

Given it was to be implemented like so:
```java
.patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired)
```

```

> client.services().withName("name").patch(service);

Reviewer 2: what's this line?

And Kubernetes recommend it is used on CREATE also:
[From](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#L272):

```
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.created(operation().inNamespace(namespace).resource(desired).create());
```

To:

```
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.patched(operation().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);
```

According to the [package being used](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

> NOTE: The version of fabric8io being used is [6.5.1](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/pom.xml#L106) which [contains Server Side Apply](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

Reviewer: We do not use Fabric8 6.5.1 but 6.6.1. Does that imply any changes for this proposal?

Reviewer 3: No, this feature still exists in 6.6.1

It is likely that other parts of the codebase will need modifying in terms of label/annotation discovery so that they only check labels/annotations that are owned by themselves.

The [`ResourceDiff`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/c3522cf4b17004004a676854d37ba01bb9a44800/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ResourceDiff.java#L46-L78) will need to filter only the parts of the resource that Strimzi owns as to not trigger a reconcile loop for externally owned resource paths.

> This will allow the removal of `ignorableFields` throughout the codebase as paths are being selected now, rather than filtering out fields.

Reviewer: You say we need to filter things. What will we filter them against if we remove the `ignorableFields`?

Reviewer 3: Currently `ResourceDiff` is looking at two things - the current state, and desired state. It's looking at all differences, and filtering out certain things explicitly that it knows other people manage (but is breaking whenever anything else is changed, even though it's not something it should care about, like additional labels etc)

Instead, it should look at the differences that are related to the desired state - instead of it being a filter of "is this in the ignored paths", it's a filter of "is this path in the desired state"

We don't need to worry about things that have gone away from the desired state, because the managed fields on the server side will handle it. There's no need to look at the managed fields on the client side here

Reviewer: > even though it's not something it should care about, like additional labels

I think you are misunderstanding the design. Not every unset field means we do not care about this field. It means that at this point we are fine with its default. And for the labels and annotations, you are actually proposing here a change to the semantic which today is that for example the labels and annotations set through Strimzi should be the only ones present on the resource => i.es any other labels and annotations not defined there should be removed.

That means that it needs to be clear from the proposal how would it work for the users who are fine with the current design and how it impacts the code and the usability. Right now, I'm not really sure what the actual impact is in some of these areas.

Reviewer 3: > I think you are misunderstanding the design. Not every unset field means we do not care about this field. It means that at this point we are fine with its default. 

Mhm. Well, I think what we're saying here is we think this design is fundamentally wrong, and it should be changed, to allow for standard Kubernetes API machinery to function as expected. Strimzi should work like other operators, which ignore changes to fields they're not explicitly setting.

> which today is that for example the labels and annotations set through Strimzi should be the only ones present on the resource => i.es any other labels and annotations not defined there should be removed.

This is not true. Annotations starting with `cattle.io/` or `field.cattle.io` are silently ignored. This is not mentioned anywhere in the Strimzi API documentation

> That means that it needs to be clear from the proposal how would it work for the users who are fine with the current design and how it impacts the code and the usability. Right now, I'm not really sure what the actual impact is in some of these areas.

Fair. Right now, anyone who's happy with the current design is clearly not suffering from a tight reconcilation loop - which means they don't have anything that is fighting with Strimzi. This means that in this new proposal, there would be no change, as there's nothing they have deployed trying to make such changes.

I think the impact on the code and usability would be great - instead of lots of explicit ignore lists, there would be a simple implementation that only looks at the fields that are trying to be set, and the references to unrelated products like Rancher would be removed. This is all a much cleaner design

It appears [this is a place](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ServiceOperator.java#L123) that the `desired` state imports existing external annotations, this would need to change to not include existing external annotations within the `desired` state as then Kubernetes would create an ownership conflict with Server Side Apply.

### Three-way diff

The live object (A) is stored in the `.metadata`, `.spec` etc. The knowledge of which fields the client previously applied, and indeed all clients (B) is stored in the `.metadata.managedFields`. And the incoming object (C) is supplied by the client. Kubernetes knows which fields were previously set by the client (in the case that the new object no longer specifies some, and they can be removed), and it knows about which client set all the other fields, and will keep them around instead of wiping out all the other labels etc.

## Compatibility

> This proposal aims to be feature-flagged as not to affect existing use of Strimzi, but also allow people to "upgrade" at their own / controlled pace.

Reviewer: I agree with this -> you should propose the feature flag name here as well as expected graduation schedule.

[From](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/AbstractNamespacedResourceOperator.java#L272):

```
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.created(operation().inNamespace(namespace).resource(desired).create());
```

To:

```
ReconcileResult<T> result = ReconcileResult.patched(operation().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).patch(new PatchContext.Builder().withPatchType(PatchType.SERVER_SIDE_APPLY).withForce(true).build(), desired);
```

According to the [package being used](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

NOTE: The version of fabric8io being used is [6.6.1](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/pom.xml#L106) which [contains Server Side Apply](https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/blob/v6.5.1/doc/CHEATSHEET.md#server-side-apply).

The operators will need modifying in terms of change discovery so that they only check fields that are owned by themselves, `metadata.managedFields`.

> The [`ResourceDiff`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/c3522cf4b17004004a676854d37ba01bb9a44800/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ResourceDiff.java#L46-L78) will need to filter only the parts of the resource that Strimzi owns as to not trigger a reconcile loop for externally owned resource paths.

Reviewer: You should clarify what does it mean that Strimzi owns something as that is not so straight forward. There are at least two cases to cover:
* Regular fields which are part of the spec.
* Entries in maps that are not part of the spec (i.e. annotations and labels)

I think you should explain how are or are not these fields owned and I'm not sure if it is the same for both or not. That will then define the main changes to the behavior with regards to what is configured in the Strimzi custom resource.

This will allow the removal of `ignorableFields` throughout the codebase as paths are being selected now, rather than filtering out fields.

It appears [this is a place](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/18d76bfabcfb9e91c71f9afda60b9dd880797f02/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/operator/resource/ServiceOperator.java#L123) that the `desired` state imports existing external annotations, this would need to change to not include existing external annotations within the `desired` state as then Kubernetes would create an ownership conflict with Server Side Apply.

### Modifications to existing behaviours

The only change to existing (non-Strimzi specific) behaviours is that Strimzi won't care about other fields it chooses not to care about. This does mean that another entity within the cluster can modify things without Strimzi's knowledge, but it shouldn't matter if the `metadata.managedFields` are chosen correctly.

> I do not know the codebase for the strimzi kafka operator so cannot comment on specific behaviours that might change, as this is just a proposal I suspect that is better placed in the eventual PR if this proposal gets accepted.

Reviewer 5: I think in this section we need more clarity about how this interacts with things like the template mechanism. Because I think this feature provides a different way to achieve the same thing. In other words I can use pod templates and secret templates etc to configure some of aspects of the derived resources. Or I can not use the template mechanism and instead let the operator create those derived resources and then tinker as I like with whatever fields the operator doesn't own. We need to give users a clear idea of which is the right mechanism for them to use and in what circumstances. 

Just to be clear: This isn't about the codebase (i.e. the Java code), it's about the CR API, which is the main contract between the user and the operator. Obviously there's a balance to be struck, but if we don't define here the scope of this work there's the risk that the PR gets bogged down/never merged after a lot of effort (both yours and ours) has been expended on implementation. No one wants that.

Reviewer 3: >  We need to give users a clear idea of which is the right mechanism for them to use and in what circumstances.

Fair. I think my starting suggestion would be:
- If you want to configure something for a single object (e.g. a single Kafka cluster), and it's in scope of the configuration, use that
- If you want to configure something that's not the currently configurable fields, you can use other mechanisms to do so (Kyverno, other controllers), and Strimzi won't interfere
- If "you" must configure something through some other method, and it's not directly being set in a different way by Strimzi, then Strimzi won't interfere and it'll "just work" (e.g. cattle annotations, pvc resizing annotations, metallb annotations. The user didn't make a choice about this other than the "I want to run Strimzi on this cluster that uses those technologies))
- If "you" (and again this may not be the direct user of Strimzi, but the platform/corporate/enterprise team enforcing policy on a wide scale) want to set certain fields, then again if it doesn't conflict, go for it. (e.g., The [Datadog admission controller](https://docs.datadoghq.com/containers/cluster_agent/admission_controller/?tab=operator) setting labels, Kyverno setting labels or annotations or automated topologySpreadConstraints)

I guess it's worth setting out explicitly if you have two things that both want a completely incompatible change (idk, Strimzi want's `replicas: 3` and you have something else saying `replicas: 1`), you're going to have a Bad Time™️.
(And that's not a change, you'll currently have a bad time)

Reviewer: TBH, I think that:
* Users should always prefer to configure things in the Strimzi custom resources as that is where they are created. It should be always preferred to validate the resources if you want some uniformity or enforce some features then to inject it in some admission controller. 
* Things which are not configurable in Strimzi are often not configurable for a reason. So if it is not configurable, think 10 times if you really should work around it.
